---
title: "Red Blood Cells Preconditioned with Hemin Are Less Permissive to
    Plasmodium Invasion In Vivo and In Vitro."
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2015-10-14
date: 2015-10-14
venue: 'PLoS One'
paperurl: 'https://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0140805'
---
Malaria is a parasitic disease that causes severe hemolytic anemia in
Plasmodium-infected hosts, which results in the release and accumulation of
oxidized heme (hemin). Although hemin impairs the establishment of Plasmodium
immunity in vitro and in vivo, mice preconditioned with hemin develop lower
parasitemia when challenged with Plasmodium chabaudi adami blood stage
parasites. In order to understand the mechanism accounting for this resistance
as well as the impact of hemin on eryptosis and plasma levels of scavenging
hemopexin, red blood cells were labeled with biotin prior to hemin treatment
and P. c. adami infection. This strategy allowed discriminating hemin-treated
from de novo generated red blood cells and to follow the infection within
these two populations of cells. Fluorescence microscopy analysis of
biotinylated-red blood cells revealed increased P. c. adami red blood cells
selectivity and a decreased permissibility of hemin-conditioned red blood
cells for parasite invasion. These effects were also apparent in in vitro P.
falciparum cultures using hemin-preconditioned human red blood cells.
Interestingly, hemin did not alter the turnover of red blood cells nor their
replenishment during in vivo infection. Our results assign a function for
hemin as a protective agent against high parasitemia, and suggest that the
hemolytic nature of blood stage human malaria may be beneficial for the
infected host.
