---
title: "Phosphoproteomics-Based Profiling of Kinase Activities in Cancer Cells."
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2018-01-18
date: 2018-01-18
venue: 'Cancer Systems Biology'
paperurl: 'https://link.springer.com/protocol/10.1007%2F978-1-4939-7493-1_6'
---
Cellular signaling, predominantly mediated by phosphorylation through protein
kinases, is found to be deregulated in most cancers. Accordingly, protein
kinases have been subject to intense investigations in cancer research, to
understand their role in oncogenesis and to discover new therapeutic targets.
Despite great advances, an understanding of kinase dysfunction in cancer is
far from complete.A powerful tool to investigate phosphorylation is
mass-spectrometry (MS)-based phosphoproteomics, which enables the
identification of thousands of phosphorylated peptides in a single experiment.
Since every phosphorylation event results from the activity of a protein
kinase, high-coverage phosphoproteomics data should indirectly contain
comprehensive information about the activity of protein kinases.In this
chapter, we discuss the use of computational methods to predict kinase
activity scores from MS-based phosphoproteomics data. We start with a short
explanation of the fundamental features of the phosphoproteomics data
acquisition process from the perspective of the computational analysis.
Next, we briefly review the existing databases with experimentally verified
kinase-substrate relationships and present a set of bioinformatic tools to
discover novel kinase targets. We then introduce different methods to infer
kinase activities from phosphoproteomics data and these kinase-substrate
relationships. We illustrate their application with a detailed protocol of
one of the methods, KSEA (Kinase Substrate Enrichment Analysis). This method
is implemented in Python within the framework of the open-source Kinase
Activity Toolbox (kinact), which is freely available at
http://github.com/saezlab/kinact/ 
