---
title: "Meta-analysis of colorectal cancer metagenomic studies"
collection: talks
type: "Talk"
permalink: /talks/2018-09-17
venue: "Advanced Training Center (ATC), EMBL"
date: 2018-09-17
location: "European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Heidelberg"
---

The human microbiome is increasingly recognised as important determinant of
health and disease, for example in the context of inflammatory bowel disease
(IBD) or colorectal cancer (CRC). A plethora of correlative links between
microbial markers and diseases has been found, but yet, microbiome studies
have not always reported consistent results for the same disease, creating a
need for cross-study comparison. Here, we present a meta-analysis of
metagenomic studies, assessing the robustness of associations and
statistical models of the gut microbiome in CRC. We analysed several
large-scale case-control studies for CRC for which faecal shotgun
metagenomics data is available. We first performed univariate association
testing while taking into account study effects with a blocked permutation
testing procedure,. Additionally, in a machine learning workflow a classifier
was built for each study and evaluated for its accuracy to predict cancer
across the other studies. While some associations between single microbial
marker species and CRC were specific to individual studies, several highly
significant microbiome CRC associations were retained in the meta-analysis
(29 marker species at an FDR of 1E-05). Classifiers trained on a single study
(cross-validated AUC: 0.67-0.92) generally maintained similar accuracy when
transferred to the other studies (mean reduction of AUC: 0.06+/-0.08).
Together these results indicate that microbiome-based detection of colorectal
cancer holds promise for non-invasive population screening in diverse
geographical contexts.
